a mass assassination Factory that was
the headline on an investigation by 972
magazine and local call into the Israeli
military's artificial intelligence-based
targeting system called habps which
means the gospel in English according to
the investigation the system uses AI to
produce targeting recommendations at a
faster Pace than a team of humans
working alone would ever be able to do
joining me to discuss this is Laura
Nolan she's a software engineer and a
volunteer with stop Killer Robots
Coalition Laura thanks so much for
joining us on upfront good to see you
again how does hop sort of work uh what
kind of information would go into an AI
based military targeting system like
this um well unfortunately I what I can
say is we don't know a huge amount for
sure and that's very typical for these
kinds of military decision support or
automation systems I mean there's just a
lot of secrecy that's involved um I
suspect that they're probably using
several different kind kinds of inputs
so we know that there's an awful lot of
surveillance that happens in Gaza uh for
example uh almost certainly there will
be Communications metadata and
intercepts um there will be very
possibly human intelligence and also
from CCTV and uh facial recognition and
any other sort of visual imagery that
they may have which might include drone
and satellite imagery so potentially
there's an awful lot of information
going into that system from all sorts of
sources sources when I hear about this
stuff for me as a lay person uh this
sounds overwhelming this sounds like the
most Cutting Edge technology possible
but the thing I was wondering is are
there even more sophisticated uh
weaponry and and weapon systems than
that that are on the horizon than just
Habs um I don't think we know um so for
example what I would say is Habs is not
necessarily a weapon system in itself um
I think the um Mass assassination Target
Factory was a pretty opposite term so
what it's doing is it's it's trying to
identify targets which will then be
struck with some other kind of weapon
it's very much um a decision support
system um but uh that doesn't say that
doesn't mean to say there's not a lot of
concerns around it um so one of the big
talking points around this system is
that it the scale of it it's um it's
producing hundreds of targets per day
potentially and we know that um at least
15 15,000 targets have been struck so
far in the conflict um so that's um you
know in the several hundreds per day um
human beings simp do not have the
ability to go and to um check in detail
every one of those um decisions that the
system is making and therefore
accountability is very much being handed
over to this system which um as you say
we know very little about we don't know
how it's been tested we don't know how
it's been validated we don't know what
criteria it's using to come up with
these targets whatsoever although from
the 972 investigation the system seems
to be geared towards um prioritizing
targets that are doing excess damage to
civilian infrastructure and indeed
potentially killing civilians and of
course that's contrary to the laws of
war which state that when you make a
strike you have to be doing it for
primarily military Advantage not to um
put pressure on a population the
investigation uh cites a Former
Intelligence officer uh saying a human
will review the targeting recommendation
before an attack uh but this person also
says the reviewer doesn't need to spend
a lot of time on it uh are there enough
human safeguards put into uh the
decision-making structure here when it
comes to an AI system like
this it's a great question and I think
one of the big questions when you have
to assess the risk around anyi system is
to what extent um are there safeguards
around it in terms of um humans in the
loop and in terms of um the overall
riskiness of what's being done as a
result of these decisions um I read the
same article you did the same
investigation and it absolutely points
to um insufficient human time and effort
spent in reviewing these targets um and
targeting targeting particularly these
kinds of dual use targets so people and
um civilian buildings is extremely hard
and time intensive so no I don't think
they are from what I see I don't think
they are properly reviewing these
targets and they're very much leaving it
in the hands of the automation system uh
in a statement the Israeli Army claims
that Habs helps in quote causing great
damage to the enemy and minimal damage
to non combatants now the death toll in
Gaza is now over
18,000 many have made the case that
evces and Technology are designed to
make Warfare more precise that if it's
more precise it'll be safer uh are you
buying that
argument no absolutely I'm not buying
that argument and this is something that
you hear all the time particularly from
the the more high-tech militaries um
typically when militaries think that
they have these more these accurate
these precise weapons um that they that
they feel able to use them in builtup
areas in urban areas in places with a
lot of civilians and civilian
infrastructure around and unfortunately
you know no matter how well you hit the
particular Point you're trying to hit
and no matter how much um what you're
striking as a valid military Target when
you're using high explosive weapons in
an urban area with civilians around you
are going to do a lot of damage so one
of the side effects of more Precision
can actually convert can perversely be
more civilian damage and civilian harm
wow so so what do you do if the more
Precision that you sort of design for uh
the more potential damage you have to
civilian infrastructure to people in
these areas that you described then
what's the solution here from a
technological perspective from a design
perspective there isn't no techn
technological solution here political
solution is what's required if you want
to safeguard civilians in this situation
there is no technological technological
solution for safeguarding civilians in
war um more Precision is not the answer
to it uh you quit Google in protest over
project Maven a contract for the US
defense department that would use AI to
analyze uh Drone footage uh Maven
doesn't sound much different than hsur
has what you were afraid of just become
our reality absolutely yeah this is
exactly what I was thinking about five
or six years ago when I was at Google
and um when when Maven was coming down
the line um you know once you have all
of this data coming out of a system
people will want to Crunch that data
draw conclusions from it and act based
on those conclusions no matter how
strained your your chain of causality
and indeed the legal basis for these
decisions that you're making is Maven
was a surveillance machine um and it it
was analyzing people's movements
people's social networks um people whole
timelines of people's behavior and their
pattern of lives and this is most
certainly what Habs is doing as well
very very similar Technologies very very
similar um problems with them the
European Union has just agreed on rules
uh to govern the use of AI in the
European market uh but the artificial
intelligence act uh as it's called
doesn't apply to defense applications or
military applications uh did the EU miss
an opportunity to properly regulate
military AI how do you do that how do
you regulate Ai and warfare it's a very
difficult question um yes um the AI Act
is not focused on Military applications
whatsoever and you know in reality um an
EU Act is probably not the right venue
to be thinking about how the military
applications of AI technology the right
venue was probably the United Nations or
some kind of treaty process to come up
with legally binding rules and
instruments to regulate these things
among all nations um how do you regulate
it um well my belief is that um we
should not be using technology to
generate targeting information
particularly when we come to the most
sensitive and risky targets which are
people and dual use um targets the
reason for that is um it's difficult
problem to decide whether a individual
person or a dual use building or dual
use vehicle is a valid military Target
or not um we do not have technology that
is capable of even beginning to decide
whether somebody is U involved in combat
or is a member of an armed group um
these matters are not something that you
can tell by a photo these matters are
not something that you can um you know
tell with uh with with by by deciding if
somebody has been swapping the SIM card
in their phone um these things uh are
difficult and sensitive
decisions and um and they require a lot
of data and a lot of human Jud judgement
human judgment let me let me I just
before we go just that word human
judgment keeps coming back to me all
this stuff comes down to human decision
making human judgments whether we look
at data or not how we look at data all
these things are human judgments and yet
much of the public conversation is about
the Killer Robots it's about the AI
technology should we be focusing more on
humans and blaming humans rather than
technology um we should be focusing on
holding humans accountable for for what
is done in Warfare and um we have there
are a lot of gaps and a lot of gray
areas in international humanitarian law
the laws of war but what is not a gray
area is that when you make a military
strike your objective has to be
primarily to to to obtain this military
effect sometimes it is permissible under
the laws of war for to there to be
collateral damage but in this case we
have a very clear-cut uh legal problem
which is Israel is making strikes
with the primary aim of harming civilian
infrastructure and using the fact that
there is um that they believe that there
is a military Target present as a fake
Lea for that and I think that's
something that people should be held
accountable for and absolutely that
accountability cannot be transferred to
any software system or any computer
system L Nolan I want to thank you for
joining us on up
front all right that is our show up
front we'll be back next
week